

# Introduction {#intro}

This book is about using the power of computers to *do things* with geographic data.
It teaches a range of spatial skills, including: reading, writing and manipulating geographic data; making static and interactive maps; applying geocomputation\index{geocomputation} to solve real-world problems; and modeling geographic phenomena.
By demonstrating how various geographic operations can be linked, in reproducible 'code chunks' that intersperse the prose, the book also teaches a transparent and thus scientific workflow.
Learning how to use the wealth of geospatial tools available from the R command line can be exciting, but creating *new ones* can be truly liberating.
Using the command-line driven approach taught throughout, and programming techniques covered in Chapter \@ref(algorithms)\index{algorithm}, can help remove constraints on your creativity imposed by software.
After reading the book and completing the exercises, you should therefore feel empowered with a strong understanding of the possibilities opened up by R's\index{R} impressive geographic capabilities, new skills to solve real-world problems with geographic data, and the ability to communicate your work with maps and reproducible code.

Over the last few decades free and open source software for geospatial (FOSS4G\index{FOSS4G}) has progressed at an astonishing rate.
Thanks to organizations such as OSGeo, geographic data analysis is no longer the preserve of those with expensive hardware and software: anyone can now download and run high-performance spatial libraries.
Open source Geographic Information Systems (GIS\index{GIS}), such as [QGIS](http://qgis.org/en/site/)\index{QGIS}, have made geographic analysis accessible worldwide.
GIS programs tend to emphasize graphical user interfaces\index{graphical user interface} (GUIs), with the unintended consequence of discouraging reproducibility\index{reproducibility} (although many can be used from the command line as we'll see in Chapter \@ref(gis)).
R, by contrast, emphasizes the command line interface\index{command-line interface} (CLI).
A simplistic comparison between the different approaches is illustrated in Table \@ref(tab:gdsl).
<!-- Still, many GIS programs ... but most teaching materials focus on the GUI ... to supplement the main graphical user interface (GUI), but  -->


Table: (\#tab:gdsl)Differences in emphasis between software packages (Graphical User Interface (GUI) of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and R).

|Attribute        |Desktop GIS (GUI)        |R                     |
|:----------------|:------------------------|:---------------------|
|Home disciplines |Geography                |Computing, Statistics |
|Software focus   |Graphical User Interface |Command line          |
|Reproducibility  |Minimal                  |Maximal               |

This book is motivated by the importance of reproducibility\index{reproducibility} for scientific research (see the note below).
<!-- , something that is often lacking in geographic work. -->
It aims to make reproducible geographic data analysis\index{geographic data analysis} workflows more accessible, and demonstrate the power of open geospatial software available from the command-line.
"Interfaces to other software are part of R" [@eddelbuettel_extending_2018].
This means that in addition to outstanding 'in house' capabilities, R allows access to many other spatial software libraries, explained in Section \@ref(why-use-r-for-geocomputation) and demonstrated in Chapter \@ref(gis).
Before going into the details of the software, however, it is worth taking a step back and thinking about what we mean by geocomputation\index{geocomputation}.

\BeginKnitrBlock{rmdnote}<div class="rmdnote">Reproducibility is a major advantage of command-line interfaces, but what does it mean in practice?
We define it as follows: "A process in which the same results can be generated by others using publicly accessible code."

This may sound simple and easy to achieve (which it is if you carefully maintain your R code in script files), but has profound implications for teaching and the scientific process [@pebesma_r_2012].</div>\EndKnitrBlock{rmdnote}
\index{reproducibility}

## What is geocomputation?

Geocomputation\index{geocomputation!definition} is a young term, dating back to the first conference on the subject in 1996.^[
The conference took place at the University of Leeds, where one of the authors (Robin) is currently based.
The 21^st^ GeoComputation conference was also hosted at the University of Leeds, during which Robin and Jakub presented, led a workshop on 'tidy' spatial data analysis and collaborated on the book (see www.geocomputation.org for more on the conference series, and papers/presentations spanning two decades).
]
What distinguished geocomputation from the (at the time) commonly used term 'quantitative geography', its early advocates proposed, was its emphasis on "creative and experimental" applications [@longley_geocomputation_1998] and the development of new tools and methods [@openshaw_geocomputation_2000]:
"GeoComputation is about using the various different types of geodata and about developing relevant geo-tools within the overall context of a 'scientific' approach."
This book aims to go beyond teaching methods and code; by the end of it you should be able to use your geocomputational skills, to do "practical work that is beneficial or useful" [@openshaw_geocomputation_2000].

Our approach differs from early adopters such as Stan Openshaw, however, in its emphasis on reproducibility and collaboration.
At the turn of the 21^st^ Century, it was unrealistic to expect readers to be able to reproduce code examples, due to barriers preventing access to the necessary hardware, software and data.
Fast-forward two decades and things have progressed rapidly.
Anyone with access to a laptop with ~4GB RAM can realistically expect to be able to install and run software for geocomputation on publicly accessible datasets, which are more widely available than ever before (as we will see in Chapter \@ref(read-write)).^[
A laptop with 4GB running a modern operating system such as Ubuntu 16.04 onward should also be able to reproduce the contents of this book.
A laptop with this specification or above can be acquired second-hand for ~US$100 in many countries nowadays, reducing the financial/hardware barrier to geocomputation far below the levels in operation in the early 2000s, when high-performance computers were unaffordable for most people.
]
Unlike early works in the field, all the work presented in this book is reproducible using code and example data supplied alongside the book, in R\index{R} packages such as **spData**, the installation of which is covered in Chapter \@ref(spatial-class).

Geocomputation\index{geocomputation} is closely related to other terms including: Geographic Information Science (GIScience); Geomatics; Geoinformatics; Spatial Information Science; Geoinformation Engineering [@longley_geographic_2015]; and Geographic Data Science\index{Geographic Data Science} (GDS).
Each term shares an emphasis on a 'scientific' (implying reproducible and falsifiable) approach influenced by GIS\index{GIS!definition}, although their origins and main fields of application differ.
GDS, for example, emphasizes 'data science' skills and large datasets, while Geoinformatics tends to focus on data structures.
But the overlaps between the terms are larger than the differences between them and we use geocomputation as a rough synonym encapsulating all of them:
they all seek to use geographic data for applied scientific work.
Unlike early users of the term, however, we do not seek to imply that there is any cohesive academic field called 'Geocomputation' (or 'GeoComputation' as Stan Openshaw called it).
Instead, we define the term as follows: working with geographic data in a computational way, focusing on code, reproducibility\index{reproducibility} and modularity.

Geocomputation is a recent term but is influenced by old ideas.
It can be seen as a part of Geography\index{Geography}, which has a 2000+ year history [@talbert_ancient_2014];
and an extension of *Geographic Information Systems* (GIS\index{GIS}) [@neteler_open_2008], which emerged in the 1960s [@coppock_history_1991].

Geography\index{Geography} has played an important role in explaining and influencing humanity's relationship with the natural world long before the invention of the computer, however.
Alexander von Humboldt's\index{von Humboldt} travels to South America in the early 1800s illustrates this role:
not only did the resulting observations lay the foundations for the traditions of physical and plant geography, they also paved the way towards policies to protect the natural world [@wulf_invention_2015].
This book aims to contribute to the 'Geographic Tradition' [@livingstone_geographical_1992] by harnessing the power of modern computers and open source software.
<!-- GIS has become almost synonymous with handling spatial data on a computer, and provides a basis for excellent open source tools which can be accessed from R, as we will see in Chapter 13. -->
<!-- todo - add dynamic reference to c13-->

The book's links to older disciplines were reflected in suggested titles for the book: *Geography with R* and *R for GIS*.
Each has advantages.
The former conveys the message that it comprises much more than just spatial data: 
non-spatial attribute data are inevitably interwoven with geometry data, and Geography\index{Geography} is about more than where something is on the map.
The latter communicates that this is a book about using R as a GIS\index{GIS}, to perform spatial operations on *geographic data* [@bivand_applied_2013].
However, the term GIS conveys some connotations (see Table \@ref(tab:gdsl)) which simply fail to communicate one of R's\index{R} greatest strengths:
its console-based ability to seamlessly switch between geographic and non-geographic data processing, modeling and visualization tasks.
By contrast, the term geocomputation\index{geocomputation} implies reproducible and creative programming.\index{GIS!connotations}
Of course, (geocomputational) algorithms\index{algorithm} are powerful tools that can become highly complex.
However, all algorithms are composed of smaller parts.
By teaching you its foundations and underlying structure, we aim to empower you to create your own innovative solutions to geographic data problems.

## Why use R for geocomputation?

Early geographers used a variety of tools including barometers, compasses and [sextants](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sextant) to advance knowledge about the world [@wulf_invention_2015]. 
It was only with the invention of the marine [chronometer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marine_chronometer) in 1761 that it became possible to calculate longitude at sea, enabling ships to take more direct routes.

Nowadays such lack of geographic data is hard to imagine.
Every smartphone has a global positioning (GPS\index{GPS}) receiver and a multitude of sensors on devices ranging from satellites and semi-autonomous vehicles to citizen scientists incessantly measure every part of the world.
The rate of data produced is overwhelming.
An autonomous vehicle, for example, can generate 100 GB of data per day [@theeconomist_autonomous_2016].
Remote sensing\index{remote sensing} data from satellites has become too large to analyze the corresponding data with a single computer, leading to initiatives such as  [OpenEO](http://r-spatial.org/2016/11/29/openeo.html).

This 'geodata revolution' drives demand for high performance computer hardware and efficient, scalable software to handle and extract signal from the noise, to understand and perhaps change the world.
Spatial databases\index{spatial database} enable storage and generation of manageable subsets from the vast geographic data stores, making interfaces for gaining knowledge from them vital tools for the future.
R is one such tool, with advanced analysis, modeling and visualization capabilities.
In this context the focus of the book is not on the language itself [see @wickham_advanced_2014].
Instead we use R as a 'tool for the trade' for understanding the world, similar to Humboldt's\index{von Humboldt} use of tools to gain a deep understanding of nature in all its complexity and interconnections [see @wulf_invention_2015].
Although programming can seem like a reductionist activity, the aim is to teach geocomputation\index{geocomputation} with R not only for fun, but for understanding the world.

R is a multi-platform, open source language and environment for statistical computing and graphics ([r-project.org/](https://www.r-project.org/)).
With a wide range of packages, R also supports advanced geospatial statistics\index{statistics}, modeling and visualization.
\index{R!language}
New integrated development environments (IDEs\index{IDE}) such as RStudio\index{RStudio} have made R more user-friendly for many, easing map making with a panel dedicated to interactive visualization.

At its core, R is an object-oriented, [functional programming language](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/Functional-programming.html) [@wickham_advanced_2014], and was specifically designed as an interactive interface to other software [@chambers_extending_2016]. 
The latter also includes many 'bridges' to a treasure trove of GIS\index{GIS} software, 'geolibraries' and functions (see Chapter \@ref(gis)).
It is thus ideal for quickly creating 'geo-tools', without needing to master lower level languages (compared to R) such as C\index{C}, FORTRAN\index{FORTRAN} or Java\index{Java} (see Section \@ref(software-for-geocomputation)). 
\index{R}
This can feel like breaking free from the metaphorical 'glass ceiling' imposed by GUI-based or proprietary geographic information systems (see Table \@ref(tab:gdsl) for a definition of GUI\index{graphical user interface}).
Furthermore, R facilitates access to other languages:
the packages **Rcpp** and **reticulate** enable access to C++\index{C++} and Python\index{Python} code, for example.
This means R can be used as a 'bridge' to a wide range of geospatial programs (see Section \@ref(software-for-geocomputation)).

Another example showing R's flexibility and evolving geographic capabilities is interactive map making\index{map making!interactive}.
As we'll see in Chapter \@ref(adv-map), the statement that R has "limited interactive [plotting] facilities" [@bivand_applied_2013] is no longer true.
This is demonstrated by the following code chunk, which creates Figure \@ref(fig:interactive) (the functions that generate the plot are covered in Section \@ref(interactive-maps)).




```r
library(leaflet)
popup = c("Robin", "Jakub", "Jannes")
leaflet() %>%
  addProviderTiles("NASAGIBS.ViirsEarthAtNight2012") %>%
  addMarkers(lng = c(-3, 23, 11),
             lat = c(52, 53, 49), 
             popup = popup)
```


<div class="figure" style="text-align: center">
<iframe src="https://geocompr.github.io/img/interactive.html" width="100%" height="400px"></iframe>
<p class="caption">(\#fig:interactive)The blue markers indicate where the authors are from. The basemap is a tiled image of the Earth at night provided by NASA. Interact with the online version at geocompr.robinlovelace.net, for example by zooming in and clicking on the popups.</p>
</div>

\index{map making!interactive}

It would have been difficult to produce Figure \@ref(fig:interactive) using R a few years ago, let alone as an interactive map.
This illustrates R's flexibility and how, thanks to developments such as **knitr** and **leaflet**, it can be used as an interface to other software, a theme that will recur throughout this book.
The use of R code, therefore, enables teaching geocomputation with reference to reproducible examples such as that provided in Figure \@ref(fig:interactive) rather than abstract concepts.

## Software for geocomputation

R is a powerful language for geocomputation but there are many other options for geographic data analysis providing thousands of geographic functions\index{function}.
Awareness of other languages for geocomputation will help decide when a different tool may be more appropriate for a specific task, and place R in the wider geospatial ecosystem.
<!-- JM: a bit out of context here
Various R interfaces or 'bridges' to dedicated GIS software have been created (see Chapter \@ref(gis)) so it's worth knowing what is out there even from an R spatial perspective: there may already be an existing (or in-development) bridge enabling functions implemented in other languages to be run from the R command line.
-->
This section briefly introduces the languages [C++](https://isocpp.org/)\index{C++}, [Java](https://www.oracle.com/java/index.html)\index{Java} and [Python](https://www.python.org/)\index{Python} for geocomputation, in preparation for Chapter \@ref(gis).

An important feature of R (and Python) is that it is an interpreted language.
This is advantageous because it enables interactive programming in a Read–Eval–Print Loop (REPL):\index{REPL}
code entered into the console is immediately executed and the result is printed, rather than waiting for the intermediate stage of compilation.
On the other hand, compiled languages such as C++\index{C++} and Java\index{Java} tend to run faster (once they have been compiled).

C++\index{C++} provides the basis for many GIS packages such as [QGIS](www.qgis.org)\index{QGIS}, [GRASS](https://grass.osgeo.org/)\index{GRASS} and [SAGA](www.saga-gis.org)\index{SAGA} so it is a sensible starting point.
<!-- even [ArcGIS](https://www.arcgis.com/)) relies in great parts on it. -->
Well-written C++\index{C++} is very fast, making it a good choice for performance-critical applications such as processing large geographic datasets, but is harder to learn than Python or R.
C++\index{C++} has become more accessible with the **Rcpp** package, which provides a good 'way in' to C\index{C!language} programming for R users.
Proficiency with such low-level languages opens the possibility of creating new, high-performance 'geoalgorithms' and a better understanding of how GIS software works (see Chapter \@ref(algorithms)).

Java\index{Java} is another important and versatile language for geocomputation.
GIS packages gvSig, OpenJump and uDig are all written in Java\index{Java}.
There are many GIS libraries written in Java, including GeoTools and JTS, the Java Topology Suite (GEOS\index{GEOS} is a C++\index{C++} port of JTS).
Furthermore, many map server applications use Java\index{Java} including Geoserver/Geonode, deegree and 52°North WPS.

Java's\index{Java} object-oriented syntax is similar to that of C++\index{C++}.
<!-- but its memory management, at least from a user's perspective, is simpler and more robust. -->
<!-- Java is rather unforgiving regarding class, object and variable declarations, which encourages well-designed programming structure, useful in large projects with thousands of lines of codes placed in numerous files. -->
<!-- Following the *write once, run anywhere* principle, -->
A major advantage of Java\index{Java} is that it is platform-independent (which is unusual for a compiled language) and is highly scalable, making it a suitable language for IDEs\index{IDE} such as RStudio\index{RStudio}, with which this book was written.
Java has fewer tools for statistical modeling and visualization than Python or R, although it can be used for data science [@brzustowicz_data_2017].
<!-- Furthermore Java is hard to use interactively. -->
<!-- Interpreted languages (such as R and Python) are better suited for the type of interactive workflow used in many geographic workflows than compiled languages (such as Java and C++). -->
<!-- Unlike Java (and most other languages) R has native support for data frames and matrices, making it especially well suited for (geographic) data analysis. -->

Python\index{Python} is an important language for geocomputation especially because many Desktop GIS\index{GIS} such as GRASS\index{GRASS}, SAGA\index{SAGA} and QGIS\index{QGIS} provide a Python API\index{API} (see Chapter \@ref(gis)).
Like R\index{R}, it is a [popular](https://stackoverflow.blog/2017/10/10/impressive-growth-r/) tool for data science.
Both languages are object-oriented, and have many areas of overlap, leading to initiatives such as the **reticulate** package that facilitates access to Python\index{Python} from R and the [Ursa Labs](https://ursalabs.org/) initiative to support portable libraries to the benefit of the entire open source data science ecosystem.

In practice both R and Python have their strengths and to some extent which you use is less important than the domain of application and communication of results.
Learning either will provide a head-start in learning the other.
However, there are major advantages of R\index{R} over Python\index{Python} for geocomputation\index{geocomputation}.
This includes its much better support of the geographic data models vector and raster in the language itself (see Chapter \@ref(spatial-class)) and corresponding visualization possibilities (see Chapters \@ref(spatial-class) and \@ref(adv-map)).
Equally important, R has unparalleled support for statistics\index{statistics}, including spatial statistics\index{spatial!statistics}, with hundreds of packages (unmatched by Python\index{Python}) supporting thousands of statistical methods.

The major advantage of Python is that it is a *general-purpose* programming language.
It is used in many domains, including desktop software, computer games, websites and data science\index{data science}.
<!--
R, by contrast, was originally developed for statistics.
It has been extended in many directions including, for example, web application development (see \@ref(adv-map)), but is still primarily used for statistics and data science, explaining its smaller (but rapidly growing) user base.
-->
Python\index{Python} is often the only shared language between different (geocomputation) communities and can be seen as the 'glue' that holds many GIS\index{GIS} programs together.
Many geoalgorithms\index{geoalgorithm}, including those in QGIS\index{QGIS} and ArcMap, can be accessed from the Python command line, making it well-suited as a starter language for command-line GIS.^[
Python modules providing access to geoalgorithms\index{geoalgorithm} include `grass.script` for GRASS\index{GRASS},
<!-- (https://grasswiki.osgeo.org/wiki/GRASS_and_Python), -->
`saga-python` for SAGA-GIS\index{SAGA},
<!-- (http://saga-python.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), -->
`processing` for QGIS\index{QGIS} and `arcpy` for ArcGIS\index{ArcGIS}.
]

For spatial statistics\index{spatial!statistics} and predictive modeling, however, R is second-to-none.
This does not mean you must choose either R or Python: Python\index{Python} supports most common statistical techniques (though R tends to support new developments in spatial statistics earlier) and many concepts learned from Python can be applied to the R\index{R} world.
Like R, Python also supports geographic data analysis and manipulation with packages such as **osgeo**, **Shapely**, **NumPy** and **PyGeoProcessing** [@garrard_geoprocessing_2016].

## R's spatial ecosystem

<!-- paragraphs (with references to chapters in the book): -->
<!-- 1. this book focus -> sf + raster/stars + leaflet/mapview (the recent state of spatial R); the history of R spatial is way longer -->

There are many ways to handle geographic data in R, with dozens of packages\index{R-spatial} in the area.^[
An overview of R's spatial ecosystem can be found in the CRAN\index{CRAN} Task View on the Analysis of Spatial Data
(see https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Spatial.html).
]
In this book we endeavor to teach the state-of-the-art in the field whilst ensuring that the methods are future-proof.
Like many areas of software development, R's spatial ecosystem is rapidly evolving (Figure \@ref(fig:cranlogs)).
Because R is open source, these developments can easily build on previous work, by 'standing on the shoulders of giants', as Isaac Newton put it in [1675](http://digitallibrary.hsp.org/index.php/Detail/Object/Show/object_id/9285).
This approach is advantageous because it encourages collaboration and avoids 'reinventing the wheel'.
The package **sf**\index{sf} (covered in Chapter \@ref(spatial-class)), for example, builds on its predecessor **sp**.

A surge in development time (and interest) in 'R-spatial\index{R-spatial}' has followed the award of a grant by the R Consortium for the development of support for Simple Features, an open-source standard and model to store and access vector geometries. 
This resulted in the **sf** package (covered in Section \@ref(intro-sf)).
Multiple places reflect the immense interest in **sf**. This is especially true for the [R-sig-Geo Archives](https://stat.ethz.ch/pipermail/r-sig-geo/), a long-standing open access email list containing much R-spatial wisdom accumulated over the years.





